---
title: A couple thoughts about Perl 7
type: post
tags: [ perl ]
comment: true
date: 2020-08-12 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> A couple thoughts about [Perl 7][].

**NOTE** the link to [Perl 7][] is to a post by R. Signes on the Perl
Steering Commitee. Probably not the best link to put, but it's what got
me think about it.

I've never been involved with [Perl][] development. Maybe I tried to
send a few documentation patches that got rejected, which of course was
wrong ðŸ˜

So, I can offer the point of view of *one*:

- amateur (little projects, mostly for personal or side-work stuff);
- eager to remain adequately educated (reading about the good and the
  bad sides of things);
- enthusiast (it's fun!!!)

user of Perl (5).

# The Principle of Least Surprise

The [Principle of Least Surprise][] more or less guides us to do
stuff (like taking a design decision) that will not confuse people. If
all *stable* releases of [Perl][] have an even minor version, we would
be much surprised if version `5.35` ever became something for general
use (beyond the fact that the versioning approach is stated clearly).

I skimmed through some of the discussions on [Perl 7][] but didn't see
it cited explicitly. I hope this is because it's so much ingrained in
people's minds that it's not necessary to put it on the table.

Anyway, this brings us to the following topic.


# Semantic Versioning

[Semantic Versioning][] 2.0.0 has the following summary:

> Given a version number MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, increment the:
> 1. MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes,
> 2. MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards compatible
>    manner, and
> 3. PATCH version when you make backwards compatible bug fixes.
>
> Additional labels for pre-release and build metadata are available as
> extensions to the MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH format.

I'm not sure whether [Perl][] 5 stuck to this rule so far, but I'm
inclined to say **no** because the deprecations did not end up with a
major version bump eventually.

Anyway, [Perl][] 5 somehow adopted a *looser* version of this approach,
striving to keep as much backwards compatibility as possible, at the
expense of ease of evolution. I think that [R. Signes's post][Perl 7]
makes it very clear.

Which means: when that "5" is changed to something else, something big
is happening.


# Putting this together

If the community/steering commitee/whatever wants to go towards a new
version of the more "classical" [Perl][] I'm fine.

If you have to make changes that break compatibility with the past,
please do them at the very beginning. Having Perl 7 be the same as Perl
5, but with different defaults, means that you're confusing people now
(*a major version upgrade where nothing really changes under the hood?!?*)
and you're going to confuse people later (*Perl 7.2 broke my code base
that was working perfectly with Perl 7.0!*).

Unless, of course, you're planning to go for Perl 8 rather soon and this
Perl 7 stuff is only a pivot.

I know that about 15 years of Perl 6 design now put some pressure on
Perl 7 to happen *fast*, but that was an exceptionally big whale and it
still takes about 9 months (on average) to deliver a child. So please,
take your time and don't end up in a doubly-confusing situation.

JAPH

[Perl 7]: https://lwn.net/Articles/828384/
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[Principle of Least Surprise]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment
[Semantic Versioning]: https://semver.org/
