---
title: Find fishy Pods in Kubernetes
type: post
tags: [ kubernetes, perl ]
comment: true
date: 2020-11-13 07:00:00 +0100
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> A little utility to find out *fishy* Pods in a [Kubernetes][] cluster.

Here's a handy program to figure out which Pods in a [Kubernetes][] cluster
are still... on their way, with the possibility of getting a hint as to why
they might be prevented from going `Ready`:

<script src="https://gitlab.com/polettix/notechs/-/snippets/1868472.js"></script>

[Local version here][]. Save it as `kgp` and put it somewhere in `PATH`.

Its usage is pretty straightforward: use it as if it were `kubernetes get
pod`. It will run the command for you with the options you pass on the
command line, and filter the output to only keep Pods whose state is not as
expected.

Examples (output slighly redacted for readability):

```
# get Pods in a weird state from any namespace
$ kgp -A
NAMESPACE       NAME     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
polettix        foobar   0/1     Pending   0          12m

# get Pods in a weird state in namespace "polettix" only
$ kgp -n polettix
NAME     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
foobar   0/1     Pending   0          12m
```

Many times, though, it's also interesting to know *what* is going wrong with
a Pod; an initial investigation point is usually the last event of the Pod
itself. For this reason, it's possible to get the last event line by setting
environment variable `KGP_SHOW_LAST_EVENT` to `1` (again, output slightly
redacted for readability):

```
$ KGP_SHOW_LAST_EVENT=1 kgp -n polettix
NAME     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
foobar   0/1     Pending   0          12m
   [Warning] FailedScheduling:...unbound immediate PersistentVolumeClaims
```

I know, it can be a real hassle to do this every time, you can either set
the environment variable persistently, or you can just call the program with
a different name `kgpe` (the added `e` is for *event*):

```
$ ln -s kgp "$(which kgp)e"
$ kgpe -n polettix
NAME     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
foobar   0/1     Pending   0          12m
   [Warning] FailedScheduling:...unbound immediate PersistentVolumeClaims
```

In this way you can decide whether you want the more compact behaviour or
the more verbose one.

Oh, a question!

> Why would you want the compact one?

Sometimes Pods just need some time to get up and reach the `Ready` state,
without necessarily being *problematic*. In these cases, the compact
behaviour prints less clutter and is perfect for running a `watch` looper,
like this:

```
watch kgp -A
```

I hope you will never be in the condition to need this program of course...
but I'm more hopeful that it will be useful in case you need to do some
troubleshooting.

Cheers!


[Kubernetes]: https://kubernetes.io/
[Local version here]: {{ '/assets/code/kgp' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
