---
title: A POSIX shell-only Base64 decoder
type: post
tags: [ shell, coding ]
series: Base64
comment: true
date: 2020-10-31 07:00:00 +0100
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> Implementing a fallback [Base64][] in POSIX shell - only.

Sometimes you might need to decode a [Base64][]-encoded file and your
environment does not contain a decoder for it. What can you do?

Taking inspiration from [this clever script][], mixed with the evergreen
[Rich’s sh (POSIX shell) tricks][], I've come up with the following:

<script src="https://gitlab.com/polettix/notechs/-/snippets/2033106.js"></script>

[Local version here][]

The initial part (lines 2 through 7) ensure that the base64-encoded
input is processed in batches of 64 characters. Any multiple of 4 should
do here, because each character is capable of emitting at most 6 bits
and we eventually need them to be groupable as octets (i.e. multiples of
8 bits); each group of 4 inputs resolves to providing 3 bytes, some of
which might be padding that is eliminated.

The transformation (lines 8 through 28) is clever in my opinion: it
makes sure to transform each input character in a series of *bit
sequence* representations, using characters `@` and `,`. They are chosen
because they do not fall in the allowed range for regular base64-encoded
data (line `0` and `1` would), hence it's possible to leverage them to
transform each input character in a succession of `sed` operations.

Afterwards, these bit strings are transformed into hexadecimal nibbles
(line 29 through 33) and eventually turned into binary data (lines 34
through 36).

This *generally* works... although not everywhere. As an example, there
is a bug in older versions of [dash][] that cuts all *NUL* values (i.e.
the `0x00`), making it... less than useful, at least for generic binary
data.

[Base64]: {{ '/2020/08/13/base64/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
[this clever script]: https://github.com/mateusza/shellscripthttpd/blob/master/base64.sh
[Rich’s sh (POSIX shell) tricks]: {{ '/2020/03/21/rich-s-posix-shell-hints/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
[dash]: http://gondor.apana.org.au/~herbert/dash/
[Local version here]: {{ '/assets/code/base64-d' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
