---
title: "K9s - Kubernetes CLI To Manage Your Clusters In Style!"
type: post
comment: true
---

[K9s][] is an amazing software to keep in mind if you have to look
around a [K8s][] cluster (e.g. for troubleshooting reasons). From their
website:

> K9s provides a curses based terminal UI to interact with your Kubernetes
clusters. The aim of this project is to make it easier to navigate, observe and
manage your applications in the wild. K9s continually watches Kubernetes for
changes and offers subsequent commands to interact with observed Kubernetes
resources.

Refer to [the repository][K9s] for installation instructions, here I'll
illustrate a few features that stuck with me and how to address a few
quirks.


## Pods

When you start it, by default you see a list of Pods. Using arrows you
can select one for further interactions. There are three commands that I
find particularly useful:

- `d` for *describe*: if anything, this is probably the thing I like
  best and makes it worth installing. My usual routine for getting the
  description of a Pod is figure out its exact name with a `kubectl get
  pod`, copy/paste it into `kubectl describe pod $POD` and eventually
  realize that I got the namespace wrong. Here it's just select the Pod
  and hit `d`. You can move around with arrows and page-up/page-down,
  you can also use a few `vi` keybindings (e.g. I noticed that `G` goes
  to the end of the description page, which is where events are shown);

- `l` for *logs*: nothing more to say about this, logs are often
  invaluable for troubleshooting and quick access to them lets you keep
  focus;

- `s` for *shell*: it tries to `exec` either `/bin/bash` (if
  present) or `/bin/sh` in the Pod (letting you choose the container if
  you put more than one).


## Namespaces

Pods live in different namespaces though, and you might not be looking
at the right one. [K9s][] keeps a small key of quick-selections for the
namespace in the top part of the screen, and usually `0` means showing
all Pods in all namespaces.

If you don't see the namespace you're after, it's possible to select it
explicitly:

- type `:ns` and hit *ENTER*
- select the right namespace in the list
- hit `u` for *use*
- hit `p` to go back one step (i.e. to the Pod list)

Now you should also have a shortcut digit to select this namespace once
again the future. This additional shortcut will be available from now on
in the specific installation of [K9s][].


## Nodes

You can get a list of the nodes typing `:no` and hit enter. No, typing
`:nodes` or `:node` *will not work*! Which brings us to...


## Quirks

Using [K9s][] I hit some edges that I would personally consider...
*rough*:

- to get a view of a specific resource type, the general way is to type
`:` (to enter *command mode*, I guess), type the name of the resource
and then hit *ENTER*. Fact is that several times the resource names are
not what you would expect, e.g. for *nodes* neither `node` nor `nodes`
will work, only `no`. Hence, until your memory muscles are properly
trained, you will find `:alias` very useful;

- when you get a new view of a resource type, a new *tab* appears on the
bottom, showing the alias of the resource. These *tabs*, though, do not
work as I would normally expect, i.e. there is no *navigation* among
them. They are a stack and you can hit `p` to *pop to the previous*,
letting the current view go for good. So, don't waste time looking for
"moving across tabs" commands, there are none!


## After this...

... we just scratched the surface. [K9s][] is a very handy tool to keep
around and I always keep it in my toolbox of programs I always "carry
around".

Happy hacking!

[K9s]: https://github.com/derailed/k9s
[K8s]: https://kubernetes.io/
