---
title: Ouch!
type: post
tags: [ perl, module ]
comment: true
date: 2020-04-27 07:00:00 +0200
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> [Ouch][] is a great module.

I really thought that I already wrote something about [Ouch][], but
apparently I'm not able to find anything. Maybe it was another
personality, go figure.

# What is this about?

Anyway, [Ouch][]. It's an opinionated way of *throwing* exceptions,
which I found extremely attractive considering its simplicity and
web-esque-enabling way of working.

This is how you throw an exception, typically:

```
ouch 404, 'Sorry, I miss this resource'
   unless exists $store{$requested_item_id};

ouch 500, "Ooops, seems there's an error in my logic!"
   unless makes_sense($current_status);
```

That's it, a code for the machine and a message for the human.

I said *typically* because you can also add a third *opaque* `$data`
parameter and basically pass whatever can make sense to track at higher
levels, e.g. to produce better logs:

```
ouch 401, "Sounds like you can't do that", {
    request => $req,
    user    => $authenticated_user,
};
```

As I said, a code for the machine and a message for the human, plus data
for the digger. Nothing prevents you to use different codes (strings,
for example, or different numbers), so it can adapt pretty well to
*your* style.

# Catching exceptions

[Ouch][] also provides some syntactic sugar when you catch exceptions.
First of all, anyway, let's see what happens when we're not doing this:

```shell
$ perl -MOuch -e 'ouch 500, "Internal Server Error"'
Internal Server Error at -e line 1.
$ perl        -e 'die "Internal Server Error"'
Internal Server Error at -e line 1.
```

So we're pretty confident that nothing bad happens when we *don't* catch
the exception. Let's do this anyway:

```
$ perl -MOuch -E '
    eval {ouch 500, "Internal Server Error"};
    if (kiss 500)    {$bugs++; say bleep $@}
    elsif (kiss 404) {say bleep $@, ($misses++ > 1) ? ", again" : ""}
'
Internal Server Error
```

It's basic [Perl][] exception handling machinery, plus a way to figure
out which exception was last thrown, and possibly act on it.

# What's with these function names?

I like the metaphor where the exception is treated like a (hopefully)
minor wound. That's why you say `ouch` when something happens, and
receive a kiss for any different of these something or an overall `hug`
that addresses them all at once. Also, swearing is not good - so you
`bleep` your messages (which actually gets rid of the user-confusing
indication of where the error happened in the code).

It's not the *only* interface available, altough I can't see anything
wrong with it. Anyway, in [JT Smith][RIZEN]'s own words:

> Some users are sticks in the mud who can't bring themselves to `ouch`
> and `kiss`. For them, there is the `:trytiny` interface.

So yes, you can use more corporate-y names like `throw` instead of
`ouch` and `caught` instead of `kiss`.

Try not to be *a stick in the mud* though.

# Safer handling

There are a few issues with using basic `eval` for exception handling in
[Perl][]. I will not trace back to the first who pointed out this, and
just provide you a hook to understand more on this: [`Try::Tiny`'s
BACKGROUND][background].

Which usually prompts me to use [Try::Catch][], i.e. [Try::Tiny][]'s
drop-in replacement that addresses these concerns without introducing
other ones (from my perspective, at least).

Alas, this means that the *exception variable* gets changed from `$@`
(or `$EVAL_ERROR` for those fond of [English][]) to `$_` (i.e. `$ARG` or
*the topic*). Which messes up with [Ouch][], that uses the traditional
`$@`.

> Confession time: I defined this as an [impedence mismatch][], which I
> admit: even with a typo, it's jargon from electronics that might not
> make any sense for people from other backgrounds. Sorry, my bad, both
> for the jargon and the typo. But you can learn more about [Impedance
> matching][]!

Anyway, if you're into using [Try::Tiny][] or [Try::Catch][], make sure
to pass option `:trytiny_var` when `use`ing the module, like this:

```
use Ouch ':trytiny_var';
```

so that [Ouch][] will do the right thing and work with `$_` by default,
saving you some typing.

# Did I convince you?

Let me know! If you want to try this out and don't know where to start,
take a look at [Installing Perl Modules][]!

[Ouch]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Ouch
[RIZEN]: https://metacpan.org/author/RIZEN
[Try::Tiny]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Try::Tiny
[Try::Catch]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Try::Catch
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[background]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Try::Tiny#BACKGROUND
[English]: https://metacpan.org/pod/English
[impedence mismatch]: https://github.com/rizen/Ouch/pull/15/files#diff-edc964c20dd564d2d42f86c5576eaef0R418
[Impedance matching]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impedance_matching
[Installing Perl Modules]: {{ '/2020/01/04/installing-perl-modules/' | prepend: site.baseurl | prepend: site.url }}
