---
title: Dijkstra's Algorithm
type: post
tags: [ algorithm, graph, perl ]
comment: true
date: 2020-03-18 21:40:33 +0100
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> Let's continue our journey through graph algorithms and see a compact
> implementation of the [Dijkstra's algorithm][]!

You can take a look to the [Wikipedia][] page on [Dijkstra's algorithm][] to
know more. Here we take a look at an implementation in [Perl][] that is very
compact... and part of the [CodinGame][] library [cglib][]. Let's just
say that here we implement the *single source* variant, i.e. fixes one node
in the graph as the *source* and computes the best paths towards each other
reachable node.

> Remember: [cglib][] is optimized for code compactness, not much for
> readability 😇

The implementation is in [Dijkstra.pm][], and leverages the same graph
representation that we already discussed in the previous post [Generic Graph
Representation][]: *nodes* are considered (mostly) opaque scalars and the
relationships between *nodes* are encapsulated in a function.

# Using the results

The implementation pre-computes everything and keeps the results in an
object that is the main entry point, so let's see that first:

```perl
package Dijkstra; # repetita juvant... especially with cut-and-paste
use strict;

sub path_to {
   my ($self, $v) = @_;
   my $vid = $self->{id}->($v);
   my $thr = $self->{t}{$vid} || return;    # connected?

   my @retval;
   while ($v) {
      unshift @retval, $v;
      ($v, $vid) = @{$thr}{qw< p pid >};
      $thr = $self->{t}{$vid};
   }

   return wantarray ? @retval : \@retval;
} ## end sub path_to

sub distance_to { return ($_[0]{t}{$_[0]{id}->($_[1])} || {})->{d} }
```

The interface provides two functions:

- `path_to`: returns the sequence of nodes to go from the *source* to
  a specific node (provided as input);
- `distance_to`: returns the minimum distance between the *source* and the
  specific node (provided as input).

There is no `new` function because... it's not necessary.

# Main function

Here's the implementation of the *single source* variant of the algorithm:

```perl
 1  sub dijkstra {
 2     my %args = (@_ && ref($_[0])) ? %{$_[0]} : @_;
 3     my @reqs = qw< start distance successors >;
 4     exists($args{$_}) || die "missing parameter '$_'" for @reqs;
 5     my ($start, $dist, $succs) = @args{@reqs};
 6     my $id_of = $args{identifier} || sub { return "$_[0]" };
 7     my %is_goal = map { $id_of->($_) => 1 } @{$args{goals} || []};
 8     my $on_goal = scalar(keys %is_goal) ? $args{on_goal} || sub {
 9         delete $is_goal{$_[0]};
10         return scalar keys %is_goal;
11     } : undef;
12    
13     my $id      = $id_of->($start);
14     my $queue   = PriorityQueue->new(
15         before => sub { $_[0]{d} < $_[1]{d} },
16         id_of  => sub { return $_[0]{id} },
17         items => [{v => $start, id => $id, d => 0}],
18     );
19    
20     my %thread_to = ($id => {d => 0, p => undef, pid => $id});
21     while (!$queue->is_empty) {
22         my ($ug, $uid, $ud) = @{$queue->dequeue}{qw< v id d >};
23         last if $on_goal && $is_goal{$uid} && (!$on_goal->($uid));
24         for my $vg ($succs->($ug)) {
25             my ($vid, $alt) = ($id_of->($vg), $ud + $dist->($ug, $vg));
26             $queue->contains_id($vid)
27             ? ($alt >= ($thread_to{$vid}{d} //= $alt + 1))
28             : exists($thread_to{$vid})
29             and next;
30             $queue->enqueue({v => $vg, id => $vid, d => $alt});
31             $thread_to{$vid} = {d => $alt, p => $ug, pid => $uid};
32         } ## end for my $vg ($succs->($ug...))
33     } ## end while (!$queue->is_empty)
34    
35     return bless {t => \%thread_to, id => $id_of, s => $start}, 'Dijkstra';
36  } ## end sub dijkstra
```

As anticipated, a `Dijkstra` object is returned: here we see that `new` is
necessary because we use `bless` directly (line 35).

## Input Parameters (lines 2 .. 11)

The function *requires* three parameters:

- `start`: the *source* node
- `distance`: a function that takes two adjacent nodes and returns the
  distance between them (or, if you want, the weight of the arc between
  them);
- `successors`: a function that takes a node and returns a list of nodes
  that are adjacent to it (see [Generic Graph Representation][]).

A parameter `id` allows specifying an *identifier function*, which defaults
to the stringification of the node. If provided, it should give a unique
identifier for the node. Heh.

This implementation also allows to avoid computing the whole *source* to
other nodes paths, and only concentrate on a list of *goals* (parameter
`goal`). You can also pass a function `on_goal` that will be called each
time a *goal* is reached (it is passed to the function). This function is
also supposed to return a *false* value when the last needed goal is reached
(allows stopping the algorithm early).

## Preparation (lines 13 .. 20)

Variable `$id` (line 13) is a convenience to make code more compact.

[Dijkstra's algorithm][] leverages a *best-first* approach to visiting the
graph: this is how it ensures that the first time a node is visited, it is
also through an optimal path.

As often with *best-first* algorithm, it's necessary to efficiently assess
which node is... *best*, which is why this implementation leverages
a *priority queue*, implemented in [PriorityQueue.pm][] (lines 14 .. 18).

Last, hash `%thread_to` keeps track of the best path from the *source* node
to any other specific node. Its keys are *identifiers*, and its values are
anonymous hashes with the following keys:

- `d`: the (best/minimum) distance to the *source* node;
- `p`: when it makes sense, the *parent* node of a node, i.e. the best hop
  from a specific node towards the *source*;
- `pid`: the parent's identifier (it's set to the *source* node id for the
  *source*, just to silence `path_to`).

## Algorithm execution (lines 21 .. 33)

Now that all preparations are done, it's time to run the algorithm!

Like many *best-first* algorithm (or in general graph-visiting algorithms),
the priority queue is explored until it's empty (line 21).

Items coming out of the queue are anonymous hashes with three keys:

- `v`: the node (opaque object in the graph)
- `id`: identifier for the node
- `d`: distance to the *source* node.

The *current* best node is called *u*, so theese values are saved into
*u*-prefixed variables (line 22).

Line 23 checks if we have some goals set and in case does early interruption
of the loop.

Lines 24 .. 32 iterate over all neighbors of *u*, which we will call *v*. We
calculate its identifier `$vid` and the possible distance arriving from *u*
as `$alt` - this is *not* the real distance, because that will only be
available when the node is *extracted* from the priority queue. The node
*v*, anyway, might already be in the queue, so we test for it (line 26) and
act accordingly:

- if it's present in the queue, we have to check if `$alt` is better or
  worse than what's already there, and skip otherwise (line 27 with line 29)
- otherwise, we have to skip considering it if we already visited it
  previously (line 28 with line 29).

If we gest past line 29, then `$alt` is indeed the best that we can do to go
from the *source* to *v*, so we `enqueue` it (line 30). This also works if
the node is already in the queue, because it will be updated. Line 31 just
records the path, taking note of the *best parent*.

# Summing up

[Dijkstra's algorithm][] is amazing, I hope you enjoy this compact
implementation!


[Dijkstra's algorithm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dijkstra's_algorithm
[cglib]: https://github.com/polettix/cglib-perl/
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[CodinGame]: https://www.codingame.com/
[Dijkstra.pm]: https://github.com/polettix/cglib-perl/blob/master/Dijkstra.pm
[Generic Graph Representation]: {{ '/2020/02/23/generic-graph-representation/' | prepend: site.baseurl | prepend: site.url }}
[PriorityQueue.pm]: https://github.com/polettix/cglib-perl/blob/master/PriorityQueue.pm
