---
title: dockermi
type: post
tags: [ docker ]
comment: true
date: 2020-03-06 18:59:39 +0100
preview: true
---

**TL;DR**

> Tired of deleting several tags for the same [Docker][] image? `dockermi`
> might help.

When generating images with [dibs][], I usually set several alias tags to
keep track of different aspects. As an example, I usually generate both a
versioned tag and `latest`, in addition to a date-related tag to keep track
of this info too. We might go on futher, of course.

When doing some cleaning, though, I have to go through all these aliases and
remove them one by one. Or have I?

I was about to write the typical ad-hoc script when I realized that... I
already had done this in the past!

<script src="https://gitlab.com/polettix/notechs/snippets/1948150.js"></script>

[Local version here][].


# Remove hanging images

Sometimes images are kicked out because new ones take their tags. In this
case, they usually end up with name `<none>`, which makes them a bit
difficult to get rid of (hint: use the image id). When you call the script
without any parameter, it will get rid of those stale, hanging images:

```shell
$ dockermi
```


# Remove all tags associated to an image

The other use case where `dockermi` can prove useful is to get rid of all
variants of a specific image name. As an example, suppose that you have
several tags associated to image `foo/barbazius`:

```
foo/barbazius:latest
foo/barbazius:1.0
foo/barbazius:1.0.3
foo/barbazius:20200306-102030-1234
```

To get rid of all of them in one single sweep you would call:

```shell
$ dockermi foo/barbazius
```

# So long!

I think it's fair to close this post here... have fun!


[Docker]: https://www.docker.com/
[dibs]: http://blog.polettix.it/hi-from-dibs/
[Local version here]: {{ '/assets/code/dockermi' | prepend: site.baseurl | prepend: site.url }}
