---
title: 2020 in retrospect
type: post
tags: [ blog ]
comment: true
date: 2020-12-31 07:00:00 +0100
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> A few trivial considerations about this blog.

I started 2020 with a resolution to blog *something* at least daily. The
goal was to *write more often*, because my main blog was lagging behind
waiting for articles that took too much time to materialize.

All in all, I consider this a success. I was able to publish something
every day, with the exception of one day in May and six days in June,
because they were really, really hard days. It's still more than 98%,
not terribly good in Telco but acceptable for a personal challenge.

Finding stuff to write about has proven hard at times and way too easy
at some other times. I had the tendency to drift towards *being useful*,
as opposed to consider this an exercise where something can come out
useful from time to time. If anything, it teached me that the important
thing is to write, like any other training it will prove useful
eventually.

I didn't start with a *specific audience* in mind. Well, actually I set
a very low bar: *future me*. I'd say that, as *future me* now (at least
with respect to this year of posts), I tend to re-open some posts from
time to time because I left *interesting things* there.

I'm not sure whether I'll stick to this habit. On the one hand, it's
like being arrived at the end of a Marathon: I'm tired and so
overwhelmingly happy to have made it. On the other, if I stop I'll
probably lose something important. Let's see.

For now, anyway... let me wish you all a Happy 2021 😄
