---
title: 'Path::Tiny'
type: post
tags: [ perl, coding ]
comment: true
date: 2020-06-10 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> [Path::Tiny][] is very useful.

When I started learning [Perl][] a bit more seriously in 2005, it was
clear that *copy-and-paste* wouldn't work. This is true of *all*
languages, of course, but there were so *many* things that you might
copy and paste (e.g. from books) that up to that time I always got my
problems solved with it.

# Path handling

One of the things that had to change, of course, was path handling. If
you have a directory name in variable `$dir`, and you want file
`ever.txt` inside its sub-directory `what`, it's easy to do this:

```perl
my $filepath = $dir . '/what/ever.txt';
```

Except, for example, that it's not really general, e.g. in Windows.

So, I learned that the *canonical* way to do path handling in [Perl][]
was using [File::Spec][] (and, in case, [File::Spec::Functions][]):

```perl
use File::Spec::Functions qw< splitpath splitdir catdir catpath >;
my ($volume, $directories) = splitpath($dir, 'this-is-a-directory');
my @dirs = splitdir($directories);
$directories = catdir(@dirs, 'what');
my $filepath = catpath($volume, $directories, 'whatever.txt');
```

This is *very* general - works on all systems - but wow it's *hard*!
Directories and files take two separate routes (`*dir` vs `*path`
functions) and you have to track them all. Without considering that you
have to carry around a lot of variables for all the different parts.

[Path::Tiny][] makes path handling *so much easier*:

```perl
use Path::Tiny; # imports `path` by default
my $filepath = path($dir)->child('what', 'ever.txt')->stringify;
```

Much more readable!

Also, the last call to `stringify` is most of the times not needed -
whenever a string is needed, a [File::Path][] object transforms itself
into one using that method automatically. Neat!

Of course, other methods are very readable:

```
my $filepath    = path($dir)->child('what', 'ever.txt');
my $basename    = $filepath->basename; # this is a string
my $parent_dir  = $filepath->parent;
my $dirname     = $filepath->parent->stringify; # ...
my $absolute    = $filepath->absolute;
my $relative    = $filepath->relative('/tmp');
my @all_in_dir  = $parent->children;
my $in_same_dir = $filepath->sibling('another.txt');
my $resolved    = $filepath->realpath;
```

The last call is equivalent to [Cwd][]'s `realpath`, which does a check
on the filesystem - so make sure the file exists!


# Reading and writing

Another thing that you might want to do is reading and writing files.

Many times you want to iterate line by line. Well, in this case use the
good ol' system 😄:

```perl
use autodie;
open my $fh, '<', $filepath;
while (<$fh>) { ... }
close $fh;
```

If, on the other hand, you want to get the whole file, you might be
tempted to use [File::Slurp][], right? [File::Path][] has you covered:

```perl
my $whole_file = $filepath->slurp;
```

Make sure to take a look at `slurp_raw` and `slurp_utf8`!

On the other hand, what if you want to save data in a file? Again...
[File::Path][] has you covered:

```perl
$filepath->spew($contents_to_be_saved);
```

Again... look also at `spew_raw` and `spew_utf8`, as well as `append`,
`append_raw`, and `append_utf8`!


# Temporary stuff

Sometimes you need a temporary file. Sometimes a temporary directory.
Those sometimes, you can use [File::Temp][]. Or...

```perl
my $tempfile = File::Path->tempfile;
my $tempdir  = File::Path->tempdir;
```

They have options... but you get the idea. What's interesting is that
these options have been put to sensible defaults, like e.g. getting rid
of temporary files when they are not needed any more. Whatever!


# Going on

We've come about halfway through the module... there are other
functions, like for creating directories, getting rid of stuff,
manipulating permissions, copying stuff... most things you want to do
with files.

If I had to find the *one* thing I would change is function `copy`. This
is how you call it:

```perl
$foo->copy($bar);
```

Wait... is `$foo` copied to `$bar`, or is the other way around? I think
that this *would* be much better:

```perl
$foo->copy_to($bar);
```

Enough nitpicking anyway... go read [the documentation][Path::Tiny]!



[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[Path::Tiny]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Path::Tiny
[File::Spec]: https://metacpan.org/pod/File::Spec
[File::Spec::Functions]: https://metacpan.org/pod/File::Spec::Functions
[File::Slurp]: https://metacpan.org/pod/File::Slurp
[File::Temp]: https://metacpan.org/pod/File::Temp
