---
title: Lonely X
type: post
tags: [ perl weekly challenge ]
comment: true
date: 2020-09-15 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> So... I entered into the [Perl Weekly Challenge][], I'll describe some
> from my solution to [Challenge 077][].

After reading so much about it in the wonderful [Perl Weekly][], I
decided to chip off some more of my scarce spare time to give it a try.
Let's see how it goes.

[Challenge 077][], much like the others I looked at, proposes two
different problems. I'll start with [task #2][] because the first one,
while initially simpler, had a change in the specifications (which, I
fear, was my fault 🤭) that proved to be a bit trickier than I
anticipated. Anyway, we'll take a look at it in due time.

[Task #2][task #2] is similar to a lot of exercises that I did when
studying computer science fundamentals (or another course on C whose
name I forgot), so it gave me that tender sensation of when things were
simpler and people smiled more... just to remember that life was *not
that simple* at the time and people likely smiled just the same as
today. But I'm digressing.

One thing that I find useful in addressing this kind of problems is to
avoid having to deal with the boundaries, i.e. avoid putting a lot of
special conditions just to make sure I'm not messing up with the
boundary of the map I'm looking at. To this extent, the excellent
[Mohammad S Anwar][] already provided us with "boundary-like" characters
for east and west limits, so it's just a matter of adding some more for
north and south.

The full solution is here: [challenge-077/polettix/perl/ch-2.pl][]. It's
(maybe too) heavily commented, so we'll just take a quick look at it
here.

The main loop over the map is in sub `count_solitaries`, here's a
stripped down version (i.e. without comments):

```perl
 1 sub count_solitaries {
 2    my ($fh) = @_;
 3    my @lines;
 4    my @counts;
 5    my @zeros;
 6    my $n_solitaries = 0;
 7 
 8    while (<$fh>) {
 9       my @line = split m{\s+}mxs ;
10 
11       if (! @zeros) {
12          @zeros = (0) x @line;
13          @counts = [@zeros];
14          @lines  = [('O') x @line];
15       }
16 
17       push @counts, [@zeros];
18       push @lines,  \@line;
19 
20       $n_solitaries += _count_solitaries(\@lines, \@counts);
21       shift @lines;
22       shift @counts;
23    }
24 
25    return $n_solitaries + _count_solitaries(\@lines, \@counts);
26 }
```

Sweeping through the input (as a filehandle) should require us to avoid
keeping too much stuff around. I mean, after we have seen input line 3,
do we *really* need to keep lines number 1 and 2 around? I don't think
so!

Hence, the idea is to make the most out of the line we read in input,
using it to complete our knowledge about the previous line, as well as
put additional knowledge on the current line. We'll then keep it around
for when the next line will come in, if any.

To this extent:

- `@lines` (line 3) keeps track of the previous and the current line
  (respectively in slots 0 and 1);
- `@counts` (line 4) keeps track of the count of surrounding items for a
  specific slot;

The initialization injects a *fake* line that is all `O`s, so that will
not be counted. Array `@zeros` is then reused at each iteration to
initialize the counts for the current line.

Lines 20 and 21 get rid of the *oldest* line and prepare for the next
iterator.

The actual counting happens in the *workhorse* sub `_count_solitaries`,
which does a sweep through the characters in the line and will be
described shortly. It is called during the loop *and* in line 25, to
account for the last line (we avoid injecting a true "after the last
line" here).

This is the workhorse sub:

```perl
 1 sub _count_solitaries {
 2    my ($lines, $counts) = @_;
 3 
 4    if (@$lines > 1) {
 5       for my $i (1 .. $#{$lines->[1]} - 1) {
 6          for my $j ($i - 1 .. $i + 1) {
 7             $counts->[1][$j]++ if $lines->[0][$i] eq 'X';
 8             if ($lines->[1][$i] eq 'X') {
 9                $counts->[0][$j]++;
10                $counts->[1][$j]++; # self-counting is OK
11             }
12          }
13       }
14    }
15 
16    return scalar grep {
17       $lines->[0][$_] eq 'X' &&  # a solitaire is a 'X' character...
18       $counts->[0][$_] == 1;     # with a 1 count (i.e. only itself)
19    } 1 .. $#{$lines->[0]} - 1;
20 }
```

Lines 5 to 13 perform a sweep through the two lines to update the counts
in the previous and the current counts. This sweeping is needed only for
the *central* lines, and accounts for easily counting the last input
line without injecting a fake final lines with all `O`s.

The counting happens for elements strictly *inside* the input (so we
start `$i` from 1 and end one before the last) and accounts for the
element on its left, position, and right. Hence, we're including the
specific location as a *neighbor* for simplicity, and we will have to
remember that being a solitaire means that the count is exactly 1.

Lines 16 through 19 perform the actual counting of solitairs in the
*previous* line (so we're looking at index `0` in both array
references). The condition for a solitaire is that it's a location with
an `X` (line 17) and that its count is 1 (because we're counting itself
too, line 18).

We're using the nice side effect of [grep][] to return the count of
elements matching the condition when run in `scalar` context, which is
the same as the number of solitaire elements in the line (line 16, note
forcing the `scalar` context).

I guess it's all!

[Perl Weekly Challenge]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/
[Challenge 077]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-077/
[Perl Weekly]: https://perlweekly.com/
[task #2]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-077/#TASK2
[Mohammad S Anwar]: http://www.manwar.org/
[challenge-077/polettix/perl/ch-2.pl]: https://github.com/polettix/perlweeklychallenge-club/blob/polettix/pwc-077/challenge-077/polettix/perl/ch-2.pl
[grep]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/grep.html
