---
title: A 4-faces die from a 6-faces die
type: post
tags: [ maths, probabilities ]
series: 'Transforming Randomization'
comment: true
date: 2020-05-11 07:00:00 +0200
published: true
mathjax: true
---

**TL;DR**

> How can we simulate a die with 4 faces with a die that has 6?

Some games require rolling a 4-sided die to get some random outcome in a
specific phase. This is usually accomplished using... a 4-sided die
(also known as D4), usually a regular tetrahedron (which has, indeed, 4
faces).

What can we do if we only have a more commong 6-sided die instead, i.e.
a cube or D6 in playing jargon? Let's take a look.

# Warm up: a coin from a D6

Let's start simple and try to generate the outcome of a fair two-sided
coin from a fair D6 die. Our goal is to generate Heads with probability
$\frac{1}{2}$ and Tails with probability $\frac{1}{2}$:

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/heads-and-tails.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

We have a (hopefully fair!) die at our disposal, i.e. a device that is
capable of generating each of its faces with probability $\frac{1}{6}$:

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/die.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

Let's take any three faces of the die (e.g. 1, 2, and 3) and ask: what
is the probability of a single roll to give us one of them? It's the sum
of the respective probabilities, i.e. $\frac{1}{6} +\frac{1}{6} +
\frac{1}{6} = \frac{1}{2}$.

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/die-aggregation.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

We're definitely onto something, because at this point we can do the
following association:

- if the D6 roll gives us either 1, or 2, or 3, then our *virtual coin*
  says Heads
- otherwise, our *virtual coin* says Tails.

and we are sure that our *virtual coin* is fair (as long as the D6 is
fair, or course!).

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/d6-to-coin.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

Any three-faces subset of the D6 will do, of course: you might choose
e.g. to take odd values for Heads and even values for Tails, or whatever
else you like. The important thing is that you decide this *before*
rolling the die!

# One step ahead: a D3 from a D6

It's easy to extend the previous section to also enable generating a
3-sided die from a D6: just group the D6 faces in pairs, and each of
them will have probability $\frac{1}{3}$ to come out from a single roll,
thus giving us a *virtual D3*. Again, it's important to decide
*beforehand* what is the *virtual D3* value associated to each pair,
e.g. like in the following picture.

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/d6-to-d3.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})


# OK, what about a D4?

The two examples above were easy because it's easy to combine faces with
an outcome probability of $\frac{1}{6}$ into the needed output
probabilities (respectively of $\frac{1}{2}$ for the *virtual coin* and
$\frac{1}{3}$ for the *virtual D3*). At the end of the day, it depends
on $6$ being divisible by both $2$ (for the *virtual coin*) and $3$ (for
the *virtual D3*).

On the other hand, the D4 is a different beast because $6$ is not
divisible by $4$, so we cannot recombine $\frac{1}{6}$-sized pieces to
obtain $\frac{1}{4}$ pieces instead. It's either too little or too much.

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/d6-no-d4.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

One powerful tool at our disposal is the *rejection method*. Let's keep
rolling the die until we get a number between `1` and `4` included,
*rejecting* the roll every time it's a `5` or a `6`.

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/d6-reject.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

If this gives out anything, it will surely a valid outcome for a D4,
because only admissible values `1` to `4` are allowed. Is it fair
though?

The overall probability of the event *value `1` comes out from a roll of
the D6* is still $\frac{1}{6}$, of course. Considering that `1` is also
an admissible value, this is also the same probability as event *value
`1` comes out of a roll of the D6 AND the outcome of the D6 roll is an
admissible value*. The same applies to `2`, `3`, and `4` of course.

This probability of the union of the two events *`1` comes out of the
D6 roll* and *the D6 roll gives out an admissible value* can be
expressed in terms of conditional probability, as in *the roll was a
`1`, subject to the fact that the roll was admissible*, which translates
into the following formula:

$$P_1 = P_{1 \cup \{1, 2, 3, 4\}} = P_{1 | \{1, 2, 3, 4\}} \cdot P_{\{1, 2, 3, 4\}}$$

The conditional probability $P_{1 | \{1, 2, 3, 4\}}$ is exactly what we
are after for establishing the fairness of our *virtual D4*, because the
rejection method *ensures* us that we got an admissible value (hence,
the condition applies). It's easy to invert the formula, then:

$$P_{1 | \{1, 2, 3, 4\}} = \frac{P_1}{P_{\{1, 2, 3, 4\}}}$$

The probability at the numerator is $\frac{1}{6}$. This was easy.

The probability at the denominator is simply the sum of the
probabilities of having a `1`, a `2`, a `3`, or a `4`; in the case of a
fair die, it's $4 \cdot \frac{1}{6} = \frac{4}{6}$.

![]({{ '/assets/images/d6-to-d4/d6-only-d4.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }})

So we end up with this:

$$P_{1 | \{1, 2, 3, 4\}} = \frac{P_1}{P_{\{1, 2, 3, 4\}}} = \frac{\frac{1}{6}}{\frac{4}{6}} = \frac{1}{4}$$

The same reasoning can of course be applied to `2`, `3`, and `4` with
equal conclusions, hence our *virtual D4* is, indeed, a fair one
assuming that the starting D6 is fair. Yay!

# Conclusions

As we saw, it's possible to simulate a *virtual D4* from a real D6,
although there might be some additional rolling involved when we have to
reject a specific roll. This happens with non-trivial probability
$\frac{1}{3}$ for a single roll, i.e. on average we will have to re-roll
one out of three times and still not be sure it will be enough!

Could we end up trapped in a nightmare of rolling over and over without
getting anything meaningful for a long time? Sure we could, but the
distribution of this is geometric with an average of $1.5$ rolls needed
to get something meaninful out, so there should not be too much to
worry.

Or should there be?
