---
title: All partitions of a set into differently arranged subsets
type: post
tags: [ perl weekly challenge, combinatorics, maths, perl ]
series: Perl Weekly Challenge 108
comment: true
date: 2021-04-26 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: true
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> Well, moving on in this series...

Previous post [All partitions of a set into same-sized subsets][] set
the base for doing the partitioning of a set of items into subsets with
the same size, making sure to only include *different* arrangements.

With this in our pocket, we can now proceed to generate all possible
partitions following a pre-definite scheme. An example of such a scheme
would be to partition set:

$$
\{ a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, l \}
$$

into two $3$-sized subsets and two $2$-sized subsets.

Does this ring a bell? It's like we're saying that our starting set has
$10$ items, and we would like to partition it according to the following
partition of the integer $10$:

$$
10 = 2 \cdot 3 + 2 \cdot 2
$$

Take a look at previous post [All positive integer sums, as iterator][]
for a refresher, if you don't know what I'm talking about!

OK, let's then move on with an implementation of a [Perl][] function
that provides an iterator for all possible partitions according to the
provided scheme:

```perl
sub differsets_partition_iterator ($sizs, @items) {
   my ($fs, @sizes) = $sizs->@*;
   return equalsets_partition_iterator($fs->[1], @items)
      if @sizes == 0;
   my $cit = combinations_iterator($fs->[0] * $fs->[1], @items);
   my ($leader_it, $rest_it);
   my @leader;
   my $rref; # "rest" after leader
   return sub {
      return unless $cit;
      while ('necessary') {
         $leader_it //= do {
            (my $lref, $rref) = $cit->() or do {
               $cit = undef;
               return;
            };
            equalsets_partition_iterator($fs->[1], $lref->@*);
         };
         $rest_it //= do {
            @leader = $leader_it->() or do {
               $leader_it = undef;
               redo;
            };
            differsets_partition_iterator(\@sizes, $rref->@*);
         };
         my @sequence = $rest_it->() or do {
            $rest_it = undef;
            redo;
         };
         return (@leader, @sequence);
      }
   };
}
```

The name is... far from being catchy. Whatever, [Stat rosa pristina nomine, nomina nuda tenemus][].

We receive the scheme as an array reference `$sizs`, filled with array
references that each carry two integer values, i.e. a count and a size.
In other terms, exactly one of the possible outputs from what we
described in [All positive integer sums, as iterator][]. The rest of the
inputs is the list of items in our set.

The idea is to adopt a *divide et impera* approach: take the first pair
and generate all combinations of the combined size, and recurse with the
rest.

Well, let's see an example. Suppose that we want to do the partitioning
in the example above: $10$ items, partitioned as two $3$-sized and two
$2$-sized subsets.

The two sets with three items inside have to be treated like we
described in the previous post, because they share the same size. To do
this, we can:

- first generate all possible combinations of $6$ elements out of the
  available $10$, i.e. getting as many items as will be needed to fill
  the two $3$-sized subsets exactly;
- then apply the reasoning to the rest of $4$ items from each
  combinations, fitting them into $2$-sized subsets.

The ending condition for the recursion is when we are left with only one
pair in the scheme: in this case, we can just hand over to
`equalsets_partition_iterator` and call it a day. This is why we check
for this condition at the beginning of the function.

Inside the *main* iterator, though, we have to keep track of two
different levels of iteration:

- the *external* one, where we iterate through all possible sequences
  generated by the *leader* (in our example, it would be all possible
  partitions of a specific combination of $6$ items into two subsets
  containing $3$ items each);
- the *internal* one, where we keep the `@leader` fixed, and iterate
  through what the recursion provides us (in our example, this means
  iterating through all partitions of a specific subset of $4$ elements
  left from the $6$-combination drawn for generating the leaders).

This is why we keep two iterators `$leader_it` and `$rest_it`. Pretty
complicated, uh?

The result is encouraging though:

```
{ {a b c}, {d e f}, {g h}, {i l} }
{ {a b c}, {d e f}, {g i}, {h l} }
... 6296 items in between...
{ {e i l}, {f g h}, {a c}, {b d} }
{ {e i l}, {f g h}, {a d}, {b c} }
```

Is $6300$ the number of partitions of this kind we were expecting? Let's
see...

$$
\binom{10}{6} \binom{5}{2} \binom{3}{1} = 210 \cdot 10 \cdot 3 = 6300
$$

Now we're ready for the big prize: generating all distinct partitions of
a set! Let's just wait for the next post... 😄

[All partitions of a set into same-sized subsets]: {{ '/2021/04/25/all-partitions-equal-sets/' | prepend: site.baseurl }} 
[All positive integer sums, as iterator]: {{ '/2021/04/19/all-positive-integer-sums-iterator/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
[Stat rosa pristina nomine, nomina nuda tenemus]: https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stat_rosa_pristina_nomine,_nomina_nuda_tenemus
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
