---
title: Two-factors authentication with OpenSSH
type: post
tags: [ openssh, 2fa, security ]
comment: true
date: 2022-06-25 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> I figured that two-factors authentications can be enabled in
> [OpenSSH][].

Like most of the things that I *figure out*, it was no secret around and
I found plenty of tutorials and how-to-s once I managed to articulate my
need to a search engine.

One useful guide I found is [this article in Linode][], which has to be
followed with a grain of salt though, especially if we want to stick
with public key authentication *and* the TOTP-based second factor. The
things in the page are correct, but the instructions for the public-key
part assume that the configuration for plain password authentication
were already done too, which might not be the case if we're aiming for
key or certificate-based login as the first factor.

Anyway.

First, install `google-authentication`, which in [Debian][] boils down
to:

```
apt update
# optionally... apt upgrade
apt install google-authenticator
```

The `google-authenticator` program should be run and the [page in
Linode][this article in Linode] does an excellent job at describing the
steps and providing suggested values.

Then we have the configuration part. In the *Pluggable Authentication
Modules* configuration for `sshd`, available at `/etc/pam.d/sshd` we
must disable plain password authentication and add the
`google-authenticator`:

```
# around the beginning of the file, comment the following line if not
# already commented out:
# @include common-auth

# ---

# then, around the bottom, *add* the following if not already there:
auth    required      pam_google_authenticator.so
```

> **NOTE** before messing up with `sshd_config` it's hightly suggested
> to have a second connection to the target, in order to correct errors
> in case of failures.

OK, so now every time PAM is used by sshd we should pass through
`google_authenticator`. Still, we have to say this to `sshd`, so in
`/etc/ssh/sshd_config`:

```
ChallengeResponseAuthentication yes
UsePAM yes
AuthenticationMethods publickey,keyboard-interactive
```

We already saw the [AuthenticationMethods... comma][]! This here means
*first require public key authentication, and after is succeeds use
whatever is fine with PAM* (that is, `google-authenticator`).

After restring the daemon things should be set up:

```shell
# first make sure that everything's fine with sshd_config
sshd -t

# then...
sudo systemctl reload ssh
```

Last, it's possible to restrict this to users or groups only, it will be
sufficient to move the `AuthenticationMethods` configuration in an
ad-hoc section of `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`:

```
# plain users are OK with public-key authentication only
AuthenticationMethods publickey

# others... need a bit more kick
Match User foobar
    AuthenticationMethods publickey,keyboard-interactive
```

And after this... stay safe, folks!


[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[OpenSSH]: https://www.openssh.com/
[this article in Linode]: https://www.linode.com/docs/guides/how-to-use-one-time-passwords-for-two-factor-authentication-with-ssh-on-debian/
[AuthenticationMethods... comma]: {{ '/2022/06/25/authenticationmethods-comma/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
[Debian]: https://www.debian.org/
