---
title: 'Cryptopals 19 - Break fixed-nonce CTR mode using substitutions (part 2)'
type: post
tags: [ security, cryptography ]
series: Cryptopals
comment: true
date: 2022-08-30 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> [Challenge 19][] in [Cryptopals][] - part 2 starting the "attack".

The challenge explicitly suggests:

> Don't overthink it.

Well, sure I like to *overthink* stuff, but this time the only thing
that came to mind was that we already saw that XORing many things with
the same key is *bad*. With code and everything.

This time it's even simpler because we don't have to guess the length of
this XORing key. It's way longer than all the plaintexts, which means
that every character position is a story by itsef.

So I went for *not* overthinking, and attack the *common* part, i.e. the
initial part of all cyphertexts that all strings have. To do this, the
minimum length across all of them comes handy.

```perl
#!/usr/bin/env perl
use v5.24;
use warnings;
use experimental 'signatures';
no warnings 'experimental::signatures';

use List::Util 'min';

my @encrypted = map { decode_base64($_) } split m{\n}mxs,
  slurp(shift // '19.enc');

my $lmin = min(map { length $_ } @encrypted);
say "min<$lmin>";
```

The minimum length is 20.

To be *very* lazy, at this point I went for a big, long string with that
part from all input strings, one after the other.

```perl
my $assembled = join '', map { substr $_, 0, $lmin } @encrypted;
```

As a matter of fact, I'm re-creating the conditions for [Cryptopals 6 -
Break repeated-key XOR][cpals6], so that we can also reuse
`attack_repeated_xor_bylen` using that minimum length as *the* length.

```perl
use CryptoPals qw< decode_base64 slurp attack_repeated_xor_bylen xxd >;
my $guessed = attack_repeated_xor_bylen($assembled, $lmin);
say substr $guessed, 0, 20, '' while length $guessed;
```

And *presto!*, the first 20 characters of *each* string come out
unencrypted, yay!

It's *marginally* interesting that the very first character comes out
*wrong*. I can tell because one of the strings starts with the pronoun
`I`, which is always uppercase in English, and yet it comes out
lowercase. Why is that? Because it's the very first character, and *all*
characters are uppercase, so both uppercase and lowercase would work,
and my quest evidently finds the lowercase first and calls it a day.
Nothing bad for the understanding!

Stay safe *and secure*!

[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[Cryptopals]: {{ '/2022/07/10/cryptopals/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
[Challenge 19]: https://cryptopals.com/sets/3/challenges/19
[cpals6]: {{ '/2022/07/30/cryptopals-06/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
