---
title: Zip bombs and quine.zip
type: post
tags: [ security, coding ]
comment: true
date: 2023-06-17 06:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> A fun challenge/puzzle: [quine.zip][].

I recently discovered what a [Zip bomb][] is:

> In computing, a zip bomb, also known as a decompression bomb or zip of
> death, is a malicious archive file designed to crash or render useless the
> program or system reading it.

In brief, it's a specially crafted ZIP archive that can easily fill up your
disk and hog your resources if opened *too eagerly* (which is what you
usually want from your antivirus).

In an effort to provide an hands-on approach for one brilliant technique
that can go on forever, it's easy to land on [quine.zip][], which provides
an interesting puzzle whose solution is at the core of how this tricky ZIP
file works. To keep the *koanish* spirit of the website, I particularly
liked the following remark:

> Yes, such a quine is possible, and no, I won't tell you what it is.

Well said!

I found a solution in 8 commands/lines; looking around, I could not find
shorter solutions, which is a good ego booster until I'll be told
differently 😎

Just for *future me*, I put it [here][] (others, please don't look at it!).
To some extent I feel like it's a bit of cheating, because the solution
found *elsewhere* to produce the *real* Quine-compliant ZIP file could not
adopt the same approach. Still, it works on that website and it's all I
needed.

Stay safe and challenged!

[quine.zip]: https://wgreenberg.github.io/quine.zip/
[Zip bomb]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zip_bomb
[here]: {{ '/assets/other/quine.txt' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
