---
title: MIME Header X-Unsent
type: post
tags: [ email, perl, coding, outlook ]
comment: true
date: 2023-09-07 06:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> I discovered about `X-Unsent`.

I like automating repetitive tasks with small command-line programs
because it's fun and spares me a lot of errors, mostly in the form of
things I forget. So it's no wonder that after the third**AHEM**thirtiest
email with the same shape, I thought about automating the generation of
those emails too.

For reasons that I'm not willing to confe**AHEM**disclose, I'm not
sending those email straight away but through the Outlook client. Only
fact is, when I generate an email in a valid, standards-compliant way
using [Perl][] (via module [MIME::Entity][], in particular), opening it
with a double click makes it appear like I *received* it, so to actually
*send* it I have to either reply or forward.

*Yuck*.

This time I decided that enough is enough and give another spin to the
search wheel. Which, to be honest, seems like it's been reset to the
nineties, considering the quality of the results, or even worse,
considering that there was not that much advertising at the time yet.

But I'm digressing.

This time I got lucky with this result (I can't remember my actual
query): [EML files no longer opening as a draft e-mail to send][result].

*Oh-oh! So it was at least possible in the past!*

I find the first reply... curious: *you can revert back*. Well, that's
lateral thinking at its finest.

Sarcasm apart, the original sender was kind enough to also provide a
solution that still seems to work in the Outlook I have in Windows: set
a custom header `X-Unsent` to `1`:

```
X-Unsent: 1
```

When this like appears in the email's headers in the file,
double-clicking on it opens the email in *draft* mode, complete with a
shiny *Send* button.

Thanks *Ralph Taylor*!


[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[MIME::Entity]: https://metacpan.org/pod/MIME::Entity
[result]: https://answers.microsoft.com/en-us/outlook_com/forum/all/eml-files-no-longer-opening-as-a-draft-e-mail-to/a75b956f-170f-4209-9a86-0f0cbec593ad
