---
title: 'App::Easer'
type: post
tags: [ perl, client, terminal ]
series: 'App::Easer'
comment: true
date: 2021-07-03 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> I worked on [App-Easer][].

A few years ago I coded a client for a project I was working on, where I
needed to support a hierarchy of sub-command. Something like the [Git][]
command-line interface client.

At the time, I looked into [App::Cmd][] but decided that I didn't like
it. I'm not sure why exactly, because it was about 8 years ago, but I
sort of remember a few reasons:

- I didn't like how command-line options were specified;
- there were (are) a ton of dependencies;
- every command is coded as a class - and I had *a lot* of commands, so
  it felt like a huge amount of work.

So, of course, I decided to roll my own module, which I never released
because... it worked for me, and didn't have much docs and tests. Then I
moved onto other stuff and forgot about it.

The main point of the implementation was to make it *extremely easy* to
implement a command by providing a few metadata and a sub reference with
the command's implementation (most of the time a call to an API library,
coded separately). I kept the basic idea of making it *possible* to have
commands-as-subclasses, though.

Fast forward to some days ago, when I decided to revive it and at least
start sharing. So after a good clean-up and writing a lot of
documentation. This resulted in [App-Command][].

Except that it's quite *complicated*. Still useable, but after a good
amount of refactoring and reorganizing, I had the distinct impression
that it could be simplified a lot, to the point of totally getting rid
of the whole object-oriented implementation with a lot of classes and
sub-classes, to adopt a much leaner approach based mostly on a data
structure describing the application.

It ended up that my impression was right: this was definitely doable,
keeping basically all the functionalities, keeping much if not all of
the customization capabilities where everything can be overridden... but
with much less code. So please, enter [App-Easer][].

There is still a lot to do, like writing a few example applications, a
tutorial, complete the manual with the gory details for expanding, etc.
but I think it's useable.

I hope it will not take ma another eight years to release it on
[CPAN][]!

[App-Easer]: https://github.com/polettix/App-Easer
[App::Cmd]: https://metacpan.org/pod/App::Cmd
[App-Command]: https://github.com/polettix/App-Command
[CPAN]: https://metacpan.org/
[Git]: https://www.git-scm.com/
