---
title: PWC098 - Read N-characters
type: post
tags: [ perl weekly challenge ]
comment: true
date: 2021-02-03 07:00:00 +0100
mathjax: true
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> A digression on [TASK #1][] from the [Perl Weekly Challenge][]
> [#098][]. Enjoy!

> This post is probably longer than it should be, [skip to the
> solution](#solution) if you want to spare you a lot of ramblings.

# The challenge

> You are given file `$FILE`. Create subroutine `readN($FILE, $number)`
> returns the first n-characters and moves the pointer to the `(n+1)th`
> character.

# The questions

The first question this time was for myself: *did you read it
correctly*? I initially thought that this challenge was a piece of cake,
at least for any language with the notion of a filehand (or whatever
their equivalent).

Then yes, I realized that the input across the calls is a *file name*,
not a file handle. Which changes the game completely: it will be up to
the function to track the state.

Which (at the very last!) brings me to the questions that should
probably pop up in an interview:

- How to deal with errors?
    - We will assume that throwing an exception is fine here.
- Is the file supposed to grow in time?
    - We will assume that it might.
- What to do when we hit the end of file?
    - We will return as many data as possible, possibly and empty
      string.
- What do we mean by *character* exactly? Is there any specific encoding
  we should take care of?
    - We will assume that characters are the same as bytes... *how
      convenient*!

# The solution

As already anticipated in the questions, we will have to keep track of
where we are in the file for each of them. This is something that is
usually done for us by [Perl][] by means of the *filehandle*
abstraction, which is also way more powerful as it allows for the same
file to be opened (and tracked) multiple times.

*But I'm digressing.*

To keep state, since version 5.10 we can leverage the `state` variable
declarator:

```perl
sub readN ($FILE, $number) {
   state $at = {};
   # ...    
}
```

If you really want to go *a lot* back in time and avoid this (why should
you want to do this?!?) you will of course have to ditch the function
signatures and use a *closed-on variable* instead, like this:

```perl
my $at = {}; # it might be a full-fledged hash instead
sub readN { my ($FILE, $number) = @_;
   # ...
}
```

This is suboptimal though, because the variable is then *leaked* to the
rest of the program scope. Which usually means that it's better to
protect the whole thing with a block:

```perl
{
   my $at = {}; # it might be a full-fledged hash instead
   sub readN { my ($FILE, $number) = @_;
      # ...
   }
}
```

*But I'm digressing.*

To track each file's state, we might do several things, like:

- keep a filehandle for each file and use it when it is necessary. If no
  filehandle is present, then a new one will be opened;
- keep the character number were we are supposed to read next.

The first approach has the advantage of being *conceptually* simple, as
well as calling the `open` function once per file. Is this of any help?
I honestly don't know, but I'd say no. Moreover, re-opening the file
over and over does not really remove any readability, so no harm in not
using this approach.

On the other hand... this will allocate a file handle, which can
generally be considered a *scarce resource*. There's a limit on how many
you can have, although it can be set and moved. Hence, if we have a
solution that can give us the same level of clarity *and* allow us to
spare resources.

Which, arguably, might not really be the point here, because we are
discussing a challenge. Unearthing these considerations might help
understand the problem better in real life situation, anyway, so if *a
premature optimization is the root of all evil*, blindly disregarding
performance as a topic is equally evil in my opinion.

*But I'm digressing.*

Reading data from a file is usually done through the
[open][]/[read][]/[close][] in a normal [Perl][] enthusiast's day. Well,
actually through [readline][] (in that normal day).

This time, anyway, it's better to go at a bit lower level, e.g. to avoid
buffering of inputs. For this reason, we'll resort to the less-used
[sysopen][]/[sysread][]/[close][] triad to go straight to the facilities
provided by the operating system.

This approach, though, has its consequences. We are assuming that
*bytes* are the same as *characters* here, because there seems to be no
indication of how to reliably infer the encoding from the file. Were we
to support e.g. UTF-8 encoding, then reading `$number` characters would
be a (generally) different beast, and we would have to either figure out
how to use the facilities that [Perl][] comes with, or re-implement the
decoding at some level.

*But I'm digressing.*

We decided to keep the "current" location in the file as an integer
offset from the start of the file. For this, we rely on another function
that I rarely use, that is [sysseek][].

Both [sysopen][] and [sysseek][] require integer values to pass
additional options, e.g. the opening mode or from where to start
looking. For this reason, it's useful to `use` module [Fcntl][] and
import a couple of constants to help us refer to the right values
instead of hardwiring magic values in the code:

```perl
use Fcntl qw< O_RDONLY SEEK_SET >;
```

It's a low-level interface, right? I can imagine that coders might have
turned the interface to use names/symbols instead of integer values, but
I guess this has been done for a couple of reasons:

- in a low-level interface, you use low-level tools and the common
  reference is language C;
- if we have to use a low-level interface, automating this part if
  probably the least of our problems.

For this reason, the [Fcntl][] approach of providing constants at the
expense of a simple additional `use` statement is fair.

*But I'm digressing.*

<a name="solution"></a> If you made it so far without hiring a hitman to
kill me 😅, here's my solution to this week's challenge:

```perl
sub readN ($FILE, $number) {
   state $at = {};
   sysopen my $fh, $FILE, O_RDONLY or die "sysopen('$FILE'): $!\n";
   sysseek $fh, $at->{$FILE} // 0, SEEK_SET;
   my $retval = '';
   my $n = sysread $fh, $retval, $number;
   close $fh or die "close('$FILE'): $!\n";
   die "sysread($FILE) \@$number: $!\n"  if ! defined $n;
   $at->{$FILE} += $n;
   return $retval;
}
```

The file is opened, read and closed at every call as anticipated.

I have to admit that I added a check on the [close][] too, which is
something that I rarely do. Not much because I'm lazy (although I **am**
indeed lazy), but because I'm always dubious about what an error in
[close][] should mean for my program. If the [sysread][] was fine... who
cares? So, this line is actually more a cargo-cult bow to purity than
something that I truly mean/understand in this case.

*But I'm digressing.* For the last time, I swear! 😄

The whole program, as usual. We default to the program's file as the
input:

```perl
#!/usr/bin/env perl
use 5.024;
use warnings;
use experimental qw< postderef signatures >;
no warnings qw< experimental::postderef experimental::signatures >;
use Fcntl qw< O_RDONLY SEEK_SET >;

sub readN ($FILE, $number) {
   state $at = {};
   sysopen my $fh, $FILE, O_RDONLY or die "sysopen('$FILE'): $!\n";
   sysseek $fh, $at->{$FILE} // 0, SEEK_SET;
   my $retval = '';
   my $n = sysread $fh, $retval, $number;
   die "sysread($FILE) \@$number: $!\n"  if ! defined $n;
   $at->{$FILE} += $n;
   return $retval;
}

my $highlight = "\e[1;97;45m"; my $reset = "\e[0m";
my $file = shift || __FILE__;
my @numbers = @ARGV ? @ARGV : qw< 4 5 2 >;
for my $n (@numbers) {
   my $chunk = readN($file, $n);
   say "got $n: $highlight$chunk$reset";
}
```

Stay safe!


[Perl Weekly Challenge]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/
[#098]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-098/
[TASK #1]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-098/#TASK1
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[open]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/open
[read]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/read
[readline]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/readline
[sysopen]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/sysopen
[sysread]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/sysread
[close]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/close
[sysseek]: https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/sysseek
[Fcntl]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Fcntl
