---
title: Bcrypt password hashing
type: post
tags: [ perl, security ]
comment: true
date: 2021-05-30 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> For a new system where compatibility with [MD5-hashed passwords][APR1
> password verification] is not needed, [bcrypt][] seems to be a valid
> alternative.

I hope.

In [A Future-Adaptable Password Scheme][bcrypt] (1999), Niels Provos and
David Mazières presented a way to make password hashing *difficult at
will*. Instead of saying "let's lay out an algorithm that requires 1 Gyear
of brute-force attacks to crack a password, hoping that in 20 years this
number has not dropped down to a few hours", they took the approach of
assuming that people will change their password from time to time, and
the effort taken to hash them can be kept up to date with technical and
technological improvements.

# What's password hashing anyway?

If I run a service with users that access with a password, I will have
to keep them somewhere. So if user `foo` has password `barbaz`, I might
have a plain text file like this:

```
...
foo:barbaz
...
```

Problem is, anybody with casual read access to that file can see the
password and impersonate user `foo`. Ouch.

One idea might be to *encrypt* the passwords, so that only those with
the right key can decrypt them and make a comparison when user `foo`
tries to authenticate. Alas, this only moves the problem from one file
to another: exposing that *key* means exposing all users in the
passwords file.

But... do we really need to ever have *cleartext* passwords to perform
authentication? The answer is now. If we use any *one-way function*,
i.e. a function that:

- given the same input, it provides us the same output;
- given two different inputs, it reasonably provides different outputs;
- given some output, it is extremely difficult to figure out one input
  that might generate it

then we can compare not the *cleartext* passwords, which would be
"exposed", but their correspondents *after* applying the function.

This is what *password hashing* is about.

For example, let's suppose that we use the [plain MD5][] algorithm to do this
hashing. First of all, when saving the password in the file, instead of
the cleartext password `barbaz` we would save:

```shell
$ printf barbaz | md5sum
c3c23db5285662ef7172373df0003206  -
```

so we end up with:

```
...
foo:c3c23db5285662ef7172373df0003206
...
```

which is a clear improvement over the previous situation. For many
reasons, though, this is not considered *enough*, so you have variants
which aim to select better hashing functions for this specific
application.

With hashed passwords, then, the workflow is the following:

```
User account creation
cleartext password --[ hashing ]--> hashed-password saved on disk
                                        |
                                        |      +--> authentication OK
                                        v      |
                                    [compare]--+
                                        ^      |
                                        |      +--> authentication FAIL
User login                              |
cleartext password --[ hashing ]--> hashed password
```


# The idea in bcrypt

The basic insight in [bcrypt][] is that a user with the *right* password
don't mind waiting *some time* to verify it - let's say even one full
second.

This, paired with a good hashing that leaves little (known) space to
collisions, makes for a very promising system.

It is important to have low number of *collisions* (i.e. distinct
passwords that yield the same output). Suppose that we have our
one-second procedure that processes an input password and only outputs
either `0` or `1`. If my encoded password is... `0`, on average it will
take a handful of seconds to find *another* input password that yields
`0` as well. If `0` and `1` are evenly distributed, it takes an average
of 2 seconds to brute force it. So yes, taking a lot of time is only...
*one side of the coin*, a low number of collisions is important too.

What takes 1 full second today, might possibly take 1-hundredth of
seconds in a few years, or worse (well... *better*). Which means that
our estimations about how much it would take to brute force today will
not be the same in some time.

Hence, the underlying idea in [bcrypt][] is to be able to tweak the wait
time and adjust it to the evolving technology. As it allows going
faster and faster, the algorithm is told to use more and more resources
so that the computing time stays about the same. The key aspect in
[bcrypt][] is to include a *cost* parameter that is aimed exactly at
this target.

Enough for low-quality explanations! On with the interesting stuff!

# So, in Perl...

The [Perl][] module [Crypt::Eksblowfish::Bcrypt][]

> implements the Blowfish-based Unix crypt() password hashing algorithm,
> known as "bcrypt".

Well, exactly what we are after, thanks!

The typical workflow for hashed password discussed above is shown in the
following example:

```perl
#!/usr/bin/env perl
use 5.024;
use warnings;
use experimental qw< postderef signatures >;
no warnings qw< experimental::postderef experimental::signatures >;

use FindBin '$Bin';
use lib "$Bin/local/lib/perl5";

use Crypt::Eksblowfish::Bcrypt qw< en_base64 bcrypt >;
use Test::More;

{
   my %db;
   sub save_user ($u, $p) { $db{$u} = $p }
   sub get_user_hashed_password ($u) { return $db{$u} // undef }
}

sub create_account ($username, $password, $cost, $salt = undef) {
   $salt //= pack 'C*', map {int rand 256} 1 .. 16;
   my $settings = sprintf '$2a$%02d$%s', $cost, en_base64($salt);
   save_user($username, bcrypt($password, $settings));
}

sub authenticate ($username, $password) {
   my $expected = get_user_hashed_password($username) // return;
   my $got = bcrypt($password, $expected);
   return $got eq $expected;
}

create_account(foo => 'barbaz', $ENV{BCRYPT_COST} // 9);

my $hp = get_user_hashed_password('foo');
like $hp, qr{\A\$2a\$}mxs, 'hashed password saved as expected';

ok ! authenticate(foo => $_), 'attempt wrong password'
   for qw< bar baz bar-baz >;
ok   authenticate(foo => 'barbaz'), 'authenticate with right pass';

done_testing;
```

The two helpers `save_user()`/`get_user_hashed_password()` represent a
save/retrieve interface against our password storage facility, e.g. a
file, a database, etc. In our case, we just use a [Perl][] hash `%db`.

Both `create_account()` and `authenticate` leverage `bcrypt` to do the
underlying work.

In `create_account()` we make sure to generate a `$settings` scalar that
is compatible with the module, encoding all parameters to drive the
hashing of the password, including of course the `$cost` and the `$salt`
(this is automatically generated if missing, although the goodness of
the auto-generated salt is dubious).

In `authenticate()` we show the algorithm we discussed before: we hash
the provided password using the same parameters as we used upon account
creation, and then compare the result with the one we stored in our
password storage. If they are equal... we're done.

Happy authenticating!


[APR1 password verification]: {{ '/2021/05/29/apr1-verification/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
[bcrypt]: https://www.usenix.org/legacy/events/usenix99/provos/provos_html/index.html
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[Crypt::Eksblowfish::Bcrypt]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Crypt::Eksblowfish::Bcrypt
