---
title: PWC100 - Fun Time
type: post
tags: [ perl weekly challenge ]
comment: true
date: 2021-02-17 07:00:00 +0100
mathjax: true
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> Here we are with [TASK #1][] from the [Perl Weekly Challenge][]
> [#100][]. Enjoy!

# The challenge

> You are given a time (12 hour / 24 hour). Write a script to convert
> the given time from 12 hour format to 24 hour format and vice versa.
> Ideally we expect a one-liner.

# The questions

One first question is about the one-liner. I mean, I have nothing
against one-liners, but the real value of a one-liner for me is when I
can easily remember it and type it on the spot, so:

- either the one-liner is really short and easy to remember;
- or it relies on a module that is normally widely available, which
  makes us go back to the previous bullet.

Now, in this case the only module that comes to my mind is [DateTime][],
which is not in CORE, does no parsing and so it's virtually not useful.
Which in turn makes me wonder if I should *know better* about other
modules readily available, or tools or...

OK enough, all of this just to say that my solution will **not** be
ideal.

Another question is about the interpretation of the *or* in the
examples. Does it mean that we can choose what best format suits to our
programmer needs, i.e. with or without a space to separate `am` or `pm`?
In this case, we will stick to [Postel's law][]:

> Be conservative in what you do, be liberal in what you accept from others.

That is to say, we will stick to a single output format, but we will
also accept both input formats.

Last... I guess it's common knowledge in places where `am` and `pm` are
a thing, but I had to explicitly search for whether `12:15 pm` means
when there's sun in the Italian sky or not. Well, unless it's cloudy, of
course. And let me tell something: it *makes no sense*. Just like
putting the month, then the day, then the year... 🤯

Anyway, we will do no input validation.

# The solution

Enough ranting, let's get to the code:

```perl
sub fun_time ($t) {
   my ($h, $m, $ampm) = $t =~ m{\A(\d\d):(\d\d)(?:\s*(am|pm))?\z}mxs;
   ($h, $ampm) =
      ($ampm//='') eq 'pm' ? ($h < 12 ? $h + 12 : 12, ''  )
      : $ampm eq 'am'      ? ($h < 12 ? $h      : 0 , ''  )
      : $h == 0            ? (12                    , ' am')
      : $h == 12           ? (12                    , ' pm')
      : $h > 12            ? ($h - 12               , ' pm')
      :                      ($h                    , ' am');
   return sprintf "%02d:%02d%s", $h % 24, $m, $ampm;
}
```

This is one of those cases where, in hindsight, I should have probably
broken the function into two different ones, to cope with the two
different possible directions of conversion. Whatever.

The first line does the parsing of the input: we always expect to get
hours and minutes, and we're not so sure about getting the day part
indicator. This is why the latter part is within a block that is also
optional (note the `?` just after it). We also make sure to get rid of
any spaces while at it.

Minutes are easy: they stay the same 🤓

For the others... *it's complicated*, like always when there are times
involved. And don't get me started with dates and calendars...

Depending on the cases, there will be a transformation in the value for
the hour and there will always be a transformation for the `$ampm`
variable that tracks what to output for the `am`/`pm` part. There are a
lot of sub-cases because after `11:59 am` there comes `12:00 pm` and we
also have to revert this... oh my!

*I'm curious to look at those clever one liners at this point!*

The whole program, should you be curious about it:

```perl
#!/usr/bin/env perl
use 5.024;
use warnings;
use experimental 'signatures';
no warnings 'experimental::signatures';

sub fun_time ($t) {
   my ($h, $m, $ampm) = $t =~ m{\A(\d\d):(\d\d)(?:\s*(am|pm))?\z}mxs;
   ($h, $ampm) =
      ($ampm//='') eq 'pm' ? ($h < 12 ? $h + 12 : 12, ''  )
      : $ampm eq 'am'      ? ($h < 12 ? $h      : 0 , ''  )
      : $h == 0            ? (12                    , ' am')
      : $h == 12           ? (12                    , ' pm')
      : $h > 12            ? ($h - 12               , ' pm')
      :                      ($h                    , ' am');
   return sprintf "%02d:%02d%s", $h % 24, $m, $ampm;
}

say fun_time(shift || '05:15');
```

Wait! What time it?!? I'm late for school!

[Perl Weekly Challenge]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/
[#100]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-100/
[TASK #1]: https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-100/#TASK1
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[DateTime]: https://metacpan.org/pod/DateTime
[Postel's law]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robustness_principle
