---
title: Brute forcing a puzzle
type: post
tags: [ rakulang, puzzle ]
comment: true
date: 2021-07-19 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: true
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> Double-checking the solution to a puzzle with brute force.

So I had a puzzle *equivalent* to the following:

> Consider a display with $N$ digits in base $b$. A random value id
> shown on the display; each possible value is equiprobable. What is the
> expected number of *missing* digit values?

As an example, suppose that we consider base-4 digits (i.e. `0` to `3`)
and a display that has 6 slots. An example value shown on the display
would be `232133`, which includes digits `1`, `2`, and `3` but not digit
`0`. In this arrangement, digit `0` is considered *missing*. Similarly,
in arrangement `111111` there are three missing digits, namely `0`, `2`,
and `3`.

# To the whiteboard!

To calculate the *expected value*, we have to know two things:

- what are the possible values $m$ that this quantity can take;
- what is the probability $P_m$ of each of those values.

When we know these two, we can calculate the expected values as follows:

$$
E_{\mathbf{missing}} = \sum_{m} P_m m
$$

In our case, each value on the display will show *at least* 1 digit and
*at most* the minimum between $N$ and $b$, so:
  - if $N >= b$, the number of missing digits will range from 0 (because
    all digits might appear at the same time on the display) to $b - 1$;
  - otherwise, the display is *short* and the number of missing digits
    will range from $b - N$ to $b - 1$.

In summary, $m_i$ is an integer whose minimum value is $max(0, b - N)$
and whose the maximum value is $b - 1$, so our expected value formula
becomes:

$$
E_{\mathbf{missing}} = \sum_{m = max(0, b-N)}^{b-1} P_m m
$$

So... we're *just* left with figuring out the probabilities!

# Brute force, at least

In the specific puzzle I had to solve, I did it with pen-and-pencil and
came out with the answer ($\frac{2916}{4096} = \frac{729}{1024}$).

Then I thought... better double check with some code! So I used the
following code in [Raku][]:

```raku
#!/usr/bin/env raku
use v6;
subset PositiveInt of Int where * > 0;
sub MAIN (PositiveInt:D :display-size($ds)!, PositiveInt:D :$base!) {
   my $total = $base ** $ds;
   my %count-for;
   for 0 ..^ $total -> $i {
      my $display = (('0' x $ds) ~ $i.base($base)).substr(*-$ds);
      my $n-present = set($display.comb).elems;
      %count-for{$base - $n-present}++; # increase "absents" count
   }
   my $num = reduce({$^a + $^b.key * $^b.value}, 0, %count-for.Slip);
   put "$num / $total ≅ {$num / $total}";
}
```

Let's see:

```
$ raku missing.raku --display-size=6 --base=4
2916 / 4096 ≅ 0.711914
```

So I was right!

But what are we doing *exactly*? Brute-forcing, of course!

We generate *all* possible configurations for the display and count the
number of missing digit values, keeping a tally of how many this count
appears. So it's the same count we did before, only at a much lower
level.

To generate all possible values we just count from $0$ to $b^N - 1$. The
display is then generated by converting the iteration value into base
$b$, adding leading `0` characters in order to fill in all slots in the
display (to do this, we add $b$ leading `0` character, then take the
last $b$ characters from the resulting string. Crude but effective).

The display is then split digit by digit (using `.comb`), then the
digits are fit into a `set`, so that we can later count (`.elem`) how
many digit values *do* appear (`$n-present`). To get the missing ones,
we subtract this amount from $b$ and we are done.

The last part calculates the expected value. All probabilities are the
counts we accumulated divided by `$total`, so we first calculate the
numerator in `$num` and then divide it at the end. The `reduce` function
is perfect here, because we want to do a sum but also do some
calculation for getting the right value to add.

Well it's been funny... for me 😄 I hope you enjoyed it too!


[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[Raku]: https://raku.org/
