---
title: 'Cryptopals 9 - Implement PKCS#7 padding'
type: post
tags: [ security, cryptography ]
series: Cryptopals
comment: true
date: 2022-08-14 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> [Challenge 9][] in [Cryptopals][].

Aaaaand we're at the beginning of the second wave of challenges. We're
starting with some preparatory work, i.e. implement a *padding scheme*.

So what's padding? If you have 30 centimers long boxes and you want to
fit 20 centimeters things, you'll have to fit some 10 centimeters of
*stuff* to avoid bouncing. That's padding.

So, in our case, we have fixed-size blocks and a generic message to
send. We can cut it into blocks, and we will be left with some that will
need some *padding* to fit the final block.

The fun thing is that [PKCS#7][p7] is actually not about padding. I
mean, it contains a padding algorithm, but it's much more! Anyway, this
is padding:

> the input is padded at the trailing end with one of the following
> strings:
>
>              01 -- if lth mod k = k-1
>           02 02 -- if lth mod k = k-2
>               .
>               .
>               .
>     k k ... k k -- if lth mod k = 0

`lth` represents the *length* of the payload.

It's mildly interesting that padding is *always* present, even if the
message fit exactly in an integer number of blocks in the first place.
In this case, we add a full block of padding, just like sending an empty
box (or, better, a box without anything of interest). This lets us
distinguish the case in which we would *actually* want to send something
that might be misinterpreted as padding.

So... let's remember that with this padding scheme we might end up with
tossing away the entire last block.

Well, easy done with [Perl][]:

```perl
sub pkcs7_pad ($input, $blen) {
   die "unsupported block length\n" if $blen >= 256;
   my $ilen = length $input;
   my $npad = $blen - ($ilen % $blen);
   return $input . (chr($npad) x $npad);
}
```

There is really nothing more to add, so stay safe *and secure*!

[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[Cryptopals]: {{ '/2022/07/10/cryptopals/' | prepend: site.baseurl }}
[Challenge 9]: https://cryptopals.com/sets/2/challenges/9
[p7]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5652
