---
title: 'AoC 2022/2 - Rock Paper Scissors cheat guide'
type: post
tags: [ advent of code, coding, rakulang, algorithm ]
comment: true
date: 2022-12-04 07:00:00 +0100
mathjax: true
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> On with [Advent of Code][] [puzzle 2][puzzle] from [2022][aoc2022]:
> elves are so predictable!

The second day seems to follow the unwritten rules of *getting slightly
more difficult than yesterday, but not too much*.

Which, of course, already got me providing the wrong solution for both
part 1 and part 2 in the first place.

Inputs are pairs of letters, each representing a single draw in the
game. It seems that elves are quite predictable at playing the game, so
much so that they collected an extensive cheat guide that is able to
predict exactly what the opponent is going to draw. Every. Single. Game.

I wonder how the game stuck with them, honestly. If all elves play like
that, they must have endured endless draws, right?

*Anyway.*

Reading the inputs this time was much easier: each line contains two
characters, so I decided to `comb` on sequences of non-space characters:

```raku
sub get-inputs ($filename) {
   $filename.IO.lines».comb(/\S+/).Array
}
```

It seems that `.comb` gives me back tuples that can be reused for both
parts, so I don't have to do anything fancy for turning each of them
into something more *durable*. Go figure.

My initial solution was... messy. It was something like this:

```raku
sub part1 ($inputs) {
   my %score-for = <X 1 Y 2 Z 3 A 1 B 2 C 3>;
   my %dscore-for = <0 3 1 0 2 6>;
   my $sum = 0;
   for @$inputs -> $tuple {
      my ($elf, $me) = $tuple.map({ %score-for{$_} });
      my $outcome = (($elf - $me) % 3);
      $sum += $me + %dscore-for{$outcome};
   }
   return $sum;
}
```

I'm not *sure* that works, to be honest. My initial solution had the
`.comb` directly inside part 1, anyway this gives the gist of the
solution: using hashes to get workable values.

We can get rid of the mapping by just doing maths on the `.ord` value
for each input character, then we can observe that we don't need no
stinkin' `for` loop when we have `.map`. This leads us to this:

```raku
sub part1 ($inputs) {
   return $inputs
      .map({[$_[0].ord - 'A'.ord, $_[1].ord - 'X'.ord]})
      .map({
           1 + $_[1]
         + 3 * ((1 + $_[1] - $_[0]) % 3)
      })
      .sum;
}
```

It's possible to coalesce the two `.map` into one, but I think it's more
readable in this way. The first one turns characters into values (this
time in range `0..2`), while the second one does the actual score
calculation according to the rules in part 1.

The first `.map` might be even moved in the `get-inputs` function, but
this would mean anticipating what's needed for part2 and I feel that
it's sort of *cheating*. I know, we're talking *ex-post* here.

The second part just asks to apply a different algorithm. It's possible
to reuse the whole of part 1 scaffolding and just change the `.map` where
the calculation is done:

```raku
sub part2 ($inputs) {
   return $inputs
      .map({[$_[0].ord - 'A'.ord, $_[1].ord - 'X'.ord]})
      .map({
           3 * $_[1]
         + 1 + ($_[0] + $_[1] - 1) % 3;
      })
      .sum;
}
```

In hindsight, I think that nothing beats a lookup table in this case, as
there are only 9 different cases. This would allow us to work directly
on each line, without even parsing it:

```raku
my %score-for = 'A X' => 4, 'A Y' => 8, 'A Z' => 3 ...
```

But we all know... *hindsight is 20/20!*

I guess this is it for today, stay safe!

[puzzle]: https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/2
[aoc2022]: https://adventofcode.com/2022/
[Advent of Code]: https://adventofcode.com/
[Raku]: https://www.raku.org/
[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
