---
title: QRate - High Level Design (provisional)
type: post
tags: [ qr codes, perl ]
series: QRate
comment: true
date: 2022-04-21 07:00:00 +0200
mathjax: false
published: true
---

**TL;DR**

> The main design for QRate, as it stands now.

I'm starting this little project with a few requirements:

- Encoding: this is where we take an input file to QRate and produce as
  many QR images as needed to get all data.
    - I'm not anticipating the need to handle very big files, so I
      assume that having the whole content in memory as a [Perl][]
      variable is fine.
    - I'd like to take a modular "pipeline-like" approach to be able to
      experiment with the insertion of additional steps, e.g.
      compression.
    - The overall output should be a PDF file, so that it can be easily
      printed.
    - Order of pages in the PDF MUST NOT matter. This is handy for
      a possible scanning phase later, so that the sheets might get
      scrambled but still be put together back in the right order.
    - Protection level MUST be set to H (the maximum available).
    - Data must be saved Base-64 encoded.

- Decoding: this is where we take something scanned and convert it back
  to a file.
    - images can be fed either as individual image files, in inside a
      single PDF.
    - order of appearance of the images MUST NOT matter.


For the implementation:

- Encoding:
    - the input file is optionally compressed with some `IO::Compress`
      module.
    - The result is encoded with [MIME::Base64][], which produces lines
      that are at most 77 octets long (76 of encoded payload plus a
      newline).
    - This encoded form is divided into slices of at most 16 lines each,
      which corresponds to 1232 octets, leaving plenty of space (36
      octets) for a header.
    - The header will match the regular expression
      `qr{(?mxs: \A (?<n> 0 | [1-9]\d*) (?<more> [+.]) \n (?<data>.*) \z}`,
      where the `n` named capture represents the number of the slice (to
      allow for ordered reconstruction) and `more` is either `+`
      (indicating that more chunks are expected after this one) or `.`
      (indicating the last chunk).

- Decoding: well... everything in reverse order!


This will be the higher level program:

```perl
# ...
help_die() unless @ARGV == 3;
my ($command, $input, $output) = @ARGV;

if ($command eq 'encode') {
   encode($input, $output);
}
elsif ($command eq 'decode') {
   decode($input, $output);
}
else {
   help_die();
}

sub help_die {
   die "$0 <encode|decode> <input-file> <output-file>\n";
}

sub encode ($input, $output) {
   my $data = compress(path($input)->slurp_raw, 9) or die "compress()\n";
   assemble_pdf(qrcoder_it(slicer_it($data)))->save($output);
   return 0;
}

sub decode ($input, $output) {
   my $data = assemble_data(slice_reader_it(pdf_reader_it($input)));
   path($output)->spew_raw(uncompress($data));
   return 0;
}
```

The two `$data` variables in `encode()` and `decode()` should hold the
same data, i.e. the compressed payload.

Cheers and stay safe!

[Perl]: https://www.perl.org/
[Raku]: https://raku.org/
